Good afternoon.
Welcome to 3D
Environmental Audio with OpenAL.
My name is Elliot Sedegah,
and I'm going to give you
a brief overview to OpenAL.
And hopefully by the end of this session,
you have a great understanding of how
OpenAL works and how you can begin
integrating it into your application
so you can get great surround
sound for your 3D environment.
So, what is OpenAL?
OpenAL is a cross-platform
2D and 3D audio API.
The API is originally designed
for games but can be used in
many other applications as well.
It's a great companion to OpenGL,
so if you have existing
OpenGL code out there,
it's a great API choice that you can
take and integrate into your code,
and then you're off and
running with great surround
sound for your 3D environment.
It's also open source,
so you can go to the OpenAL website,
download the latest sources,
and take a look and see how it's
supported for all the existing
platforms that it's out there for.
And another little bit of good
news is it's now shipping as a
pre-installed framework for Tiger,
so it's going to be there for
all your users using 10.4.
And if you're looking for
support earlier than that,
it goes as far back as 10.28,
so that's pretty good news.
Let's talk about some of
the main features of OpenAL.
With OpenAL,
you get stereo and surround sound.
This is great for your 3D environment,
so you're not limited to just a stereo
with the right and left channels.
You get surround sound using
all your speakers up to 5.0.
And you get positional audio,
so you can localize sound
in three-dimensional space.
For example,
if you had an object on the right
side of your screen and you wanted
your user to experience sound
coming from the right speaker,
you can easily do that by
supplying coordinates to OpenAL.
And if you can move this object
around from right to left,
and then you get a panning-like
effect moving from the right
speaker to the left speaker.
And you can move it back
and forth in a distance,
and depending on the distance
it is from a listener,
the sound will be attenuated.
So it will be sounding a
little bit softer or louder
depending on the distance.
You can change the pitch, too,
and you can do all this while it's
playing without much work at all.
OpenAL uses the same exact
coordinates as OpenGL.
So OpenGL uses a 3D Cartesian
coordinate system using the X,
Y, and Z planes.
So if you look at the
chart on your screen here,
you can see a point in
three-dimensional space at 0.5,
5, and 0.
If you wanted to specify
this point using OpenGL code,
many of you might be already
familiar with OpenGL,
and you would use a GL vertex
command with the floats 5,
5, and 0.
In OpenAL,
if you wanted to attach a sound source to
this object in three-dimensional space,
this could be an explosion,
this could be a plane flying overhead,
it could be a car driving by,
whatever you want it to be in your game,
you can use the AL source command
and use the same exact coordinates
that you're using in OpenGL space,
so you can see how your variables
can be reused and you can add
sound and integrate it into
your game or your application.
Another interesting thing to point
out here is that OpenAL also uses
the same API conventions as OpenGL.
So you can see the three
F here in GL space.
Most of you guys are familiar with it,
knowing that this is supposed
to specify you needed to add
three floats to this method.
The same exact thing is done in OpenAL,
and this convention is
followed throughout.
So it'll be easy for you
GL programmers to pick up on this,
and you'll be up and running in no time.
OpenAL is built with
Core Audio for Mac OS X.
So it's built entirely with Core Audio.
Core Audio is used to interface to
all of the user's audio devices,
so FireWire, USB,
stereo or surround sound,
everything that the user can support,
OpenAL is going to get that.
And it's combined with
the power of audio units,
the 3D mixer audio unit,
which is used to localize your
sound in three-dimensional space.
So you can have your objects just mixed,
and you don't have to worry
about all the hard work there.
The OpenAL implementation
is going to do that for you,
because the 3D mixer handles
the localization and it
handles speaker configurations,
sample rate conversions,
a lot of the really difficult
work that it takes to get a good
sound engine up and running.
And it's packaged inside a nice,
easy-to-use API,
so you can just use that code
and you're up and running.
It's also cross-platform.
So the code that you write for us,
you can use it other places as well.
Mac OS X's implementation
is done in Core Audio,
and that same code can be used in
other platforms that you care about,
such as Windows and Linux,
other game platforms as Sony PS2,
GameCube, Xbox, just to name a few.
There's a large listing of
platforms that are supported,
and if you're interested in what
their underlying implementation is,
you can go to the OpenAL website,
and it has details on the website,
So you can make that in your decisions
when you're making your game.
Here's a list of a few games that
we have that are running OpenAL.
I mean, there's a longer list than this,
but we just took out a few
just to illustrate a point.
And as you can see,
these are major titles.
Really big.
The list has been growing
over the past year.
You can see on here that a lot
of these are also cross-platform.
And OpenAL is a big reason for this.
Because of the
cross-platform code nature,
you really had to make maybe a
few changes just to get it running
on several different platforms.
And if you look on here,
you can see Blender 3D.
And that's not a game.
And you can see that this is
not limited just to games.
So if you have an application
that's 3D and you want 3D sound,
OpenAL is a great choice.
Game engines and libraries are
also hopping into the action,
too.
Many popular ones that I'm sure
many of you could be using,
Agent AE, Torque, and Unreal,
they're all adopting to use OpenAL now,
mainly because of their
cross-platform nature,
some reasons because of the performance,
many different reasons
why you should use OpenAL.
Now that you know how OpenAL works,
just the overall 30,000 feet view of,
hey, this is what it does,
I'd like to invite Ryan Gordon,
freelance software
developer on the stage,
give you a brief story about how
his experience is using OpenAL.
Can you hear me?
Okay, good.
Hi, my name is Ryan Gordon.
I'm a freelance game developer.
Mostly I specialize in porting
games from Windows to Mac OS and
Linux and things like that.
So what we're going to show
you on the screen back here is
a game called Feeding Frenzy.
The OpenAL is a game piloted
by the talented Rich Hernandez,
who is a feeding frenzy ninja.
Basically, this game is very simple.
What I want to talk to you about
is mostly we talk in OpenAL in
terms of positional audio,
3D space, and...
[Transcript missing]
So, what we're looking at
here with Feeding Frenzy,
it's very simple.
You've probably already picked
up the rules of this game.
You move a fish around the screen,
you eat smaller fish,
you avoid the bigger fish,
and as you get bigger,
you eat the bigger fish too.
It's a little bit of
Darwinism in your video game.
But it's simple, it's non-intrusive,
it's non-threatening.
You could give this to your
grandmother and she would love it.
And by the way,
it's on sale now at gamehouse.com.
So, this was originally a Windows title.
When we first started working with this,
it was Windows that used DirectX.
Specifically for audio,
it used 2D direct sound,
not even direct sound 3D.
And looking at options
to move this to the Mac,
we thought about Core Audio,
we thought about SDL,
we thought about SDL Mixer, you know,
higher-level things.
And we found that OpenAL was actually
the best choice for a number of reasons.
When you look at the original game,
as you are now, when you look at this,
it only wanted to do things at the
source code level at a high level,
in higher-level stuff.
For example, they wanted to do, you know,
play this sound, just fire this sound
off and forget about it.
We want to stream music,
but we don't really want to do
anything but play it in the background,
nothing fancy like that.
At most, in terms of positional audio,
it wants to pan things left
and right on stereo speakers,
but it doesn't really want to
think about it beyond that.
In that sense,
OpenAL worked incredibly well.
Because that maps very
closely to the API.
Instead of talking about a 3D thing,
you just talk about things on one plane.
But otherwise, you use the API exactly as
you would in a 3D sense.
So when we started working on this,
we moved it from direct sound to OpenAL.
And instead of trying
to re-engineer stuff,
anyone who's ever reported a video game,
reported any software,
knows you don't want to
touch the original source
any more than you have to.
Okay, maybe you haven't done that.
So we started working on this.
Instead of trying to re-engineer things,
say, how can we make this work best
with an alien audio API and such,
we moved it over.
We just copied the file one, you know,
just directly copied the C file that
implemented all the direct sound stuff
and just went through it line by line,
cutting out the direct sound stuff,
leaving the higher level structure
there and just replacing it
line for line with OpenAL.
So we did a word count,
a line count on this the other day
to see just where this turned out,
you know,
now that everything's done and debugged.
Changing it from direct sound
to OpenAL took about a day,
and that's to write it and debug
it and play it and be done with it.
That worked out incredibly nicely because
no one wants to spend time working.
I don't, I don't know.
So after that was done and
after spending a day on it,
I looked at the line counts,
and the direct sound code...
Went from about 3,500 lines of C code,
just straight, no-nonsense C++ code,
3,500 lines.
When we were done with
the OpenAL version,
it was about 1,000 lines.
So literally, it was three and a half
times less code to deal with,
which is wonderful in terms of debugging
and maintenance and such like that.
So,
some of the other basic benefits here,
just to run down this very quickly,
and you're going to hear some
of these things again and
again throughout this session,
but it was cross-platform.
The exact same OpenAL code,
when we were done replacing
the direct sound code,
ran on Windows, Linux, and Mac OS.
Out of the box, there was exactly zero
if-defs in the code.
There's none at all.
Just the exact same
code worked everywhere.
Now, to be fair,
there are zero if-defs in the
direct sound code as well,
but that's only going to run
on Windows for obvious reasons.
So, that worked out incredibly well.
In terms of maintenance,
there's less to look at,
less to figure out.
There's no corner cases
in it where you think,
you know, geez,
did I set up this primary direct sound
buffer to be in cooperative mode?
And what happens if
they change users on me?
Will it stop playing
music and such like that?
And those things became a non-issue.
We never had to look at this
in terms of a byte-wise buffer.
We never had to think, okay,
we have 10 bytes left in this buffer,
then we have to wrap around the
beginning and start writing stuff there.
You know, with OpenAL, you just say,
"Hey, I have this much more data.
Please play it when you get a chance."
With the buffer queuing mechanism,
and it works great.
Another benefit, and this is true in the
direct sound version too,
is that the Windows version
is stereo only.
And, you know, like I said,
we're not using positional audio,
but it's always nice
to know that on a Mac,
when you're using OpenAL,
if you have eight speakers
hooked up to your machine,
if you have a five-speaker
setup or whatever,
if you have more than two speakers,
it's just going to work right.
I don't have to be like, "Well,
all but your first two
speakers are going to be quiet.
Sorry,
there's nothing we can do about it."
That was a huge benefit for that.
Um,
That's pretty much it.
Otherwise,
it was just in terms of man-hours
and maintenance and code size
and readability and usability,
all of those things.
OpenAL was just incredibly
better for us than DirectSound.
And to be fair,
if you look at most APIs out there,
you're going to find that if you'd
moved it to any other API such as SDL,
you're going to find a lot of these
same benefits that OpenAL gave you.
You find that you'd
have these same fights.
I don't want to blame
DirectSound specifically,
although I know it's easy to
do at a Macintosh conference.
But in those senses,
it worked out very well for us.
I would definitely use it.
This is the first 2D
game I'd used OpenAL on.
I didn't expect it to be this easy.
I thought it worked out really well.
Mostly before now,
my OpenAL usage was on 3D
games for obvious reasons.
But even on a 2D game,
it worked out great.
So don't be intimidated to use this API,
even if you don't have a big,
grand-scale, multi-million-dollar, 3D,
immersive, complicated game.
Even for independent developers
or small-scale developers
or puzzle game developers,
it works out wonderfully.
I'd highly recommend it to anyone.
So that's what I have to say.
Thank you, Rich, for helping us out here.
I'm going to give the
microphone over to Bob now,
who's a core audio engineer,
and he's going to talk some more
about the specifics of OpenAL.
Thank you.
Yeah, that was great.
Thanks.
Good afternoon.
My name is Bob Aaron,
and I work at Apple as
a Core Audio engineer.
And I'm gonna talk a little
bit about how to use OpenAL.
So if we can get back to the slides,
please.
Okay,
so the main thing I want you to take
away from my part of the session
really is an understanding of
what the OpenAL architecture looks
like and how the APIs are used.
And secondly, as Ryan and Elliot have
already alluded to,
to see what the benefit really is for
you to use OpenAL in your application.
By letting OpenAL do all
the difficult audio work,
such as optimized audio processing and
dealing with the devices on your user
system and multi-speaker configurations.
So if we take just a top-level view
of what the architecture looks like,
we can see that OpenAL basically
is divided up into five components.
And the first thing you'll want to
do when you're adding OpenAL into
your application is you have to
do a little bit of initializing.
And so the first component we'll
talk about is the OpenAL device.
Now the OpenAL device is the component
that basically is going to deliver your
rendered audio data out to some hardware.
And on Mac OS X,
this device is the default output device
that your user sets up in their system
preferences or in the audio MIDI setup.
And what's really nice
about this mechanism is,
again,
your application doesn't have to know
anything about the hardware on your
system or the speakers or anything.
It's just going to work and render out
to what your user has already selected.
Now the next component you'll need to
do-- to look at when you are doing some
initializing is the OpenAL Context.
Now this is your rendering context.
It's basically your virtual space,
or your environment for your
game or your application.
Now it contains some objects
that are moving around in space,
making sound.
An object that moves also around
in space that it can observe
all those sound making objects.
And it defines some parameters on
how all of those things are rendered.
And then ultimately delivers the
rendered audio out to the OpenAL device.
So these are what the APIs look like,
basically,
for opening and closing devices and
creating and destroying context.
But instead of walking through
the APIs parameter at a time,
let me just show you
a little bit of code.
So I'm going to run a
small demo in a little bit,
and I'll show you all the OpenAL code
that's needed to run this.
And so we'll start out here.
The first line there that the arrow's
pointing to is a call to ALC OpenDevice.
Now, you notice that it's passing null.
The reason we're doing
that on Mac OS X is null,
this is the device name string,
but since we're always using
the default output device,
we can just pass null.
That sort of indicates to
use the system device or the
default device for the user.
Now,
once we actually have that device back,
we need to pass it to
a create context call.
And the context call,
you can have multiple contexts,
and they always render to that device,
so you have to pass the device in.
Now, you notice that there's
a second parameter,
zero.
That's actually an attribute list.
On Mac OS X,
you don't have to pass any attributes.
You can just pass zero there.
And then lastly, as I mentioned,
you can have multiple contexts
or multiple spatial environments,
but you have to have one that's
designated as the current context.
That's the context that
will receive changes.
You have to have it defined already so
that as you make changes to parameters,
the API knows which context
you're talking about.
Okay, so now that we have our
device and our context,
the next object we'll talk
about is the OpenAO listener.
Now,
the listener is implicit to your context.
Each context has a single listener,
and it can be moved around in space,
just like the objects
that are making sound.
And it's really the object that
represents how your user is going
to experience your application
when they're running it,
and so for you GL programmers,
it would equate, basically, to a camera.
It's, again, the way that your user is
going to experience this.
So one of the most important
attributes you'll be setting for your
OpenAL listener is the orientation.
Now again, in GL terms,
your orientation is like making
a call to GL you look at.
It defines which way your listener
is looking in your virtual space.
And so it's defined as two vectors,
an at vector and an up vector.
And those are XYZ vectors,
and they must be
orthogonal to each other.
That's defined in the specification.
And if you look at the little
code box at the bottom,
again, you're going to see some
conventions that are similar to GL.
We have an AL listener FV, F for float,
V for vector.
And we're going to pass in
those at and up XYZ vectors.
Now to demonstrate sort of
how the orientation works,
let me just show you a diagram.
So on the left-hand side there,
we have a virtual space,
and it contains some objects.
And in the center is our listener.
And then the circles,
the blue and the red circles,
are some graphical objects that
you may have in your application.
And then the text there for car
horn and dog barking sort of
represents some objects that may be
making sound in your environment.
This is a top-down view on
the X and Z coordinates.
If we look on the right-hand
side of the screen,
this would represent the user
sitting in front of their monitor.
They can experience that blue object,
they can see it in their monitor,
but they can localize the car horn
and the dog barking appropriately
in front and to the rear right.
I just wanted to point
out one more thing.
This is the default orientation for your
listener when your context is created.
It's looking down the negative Z axis.
So if we wanted your
listener to experience,
be able to experience the
other graphical objects,
we can now turn around your,
the sign on your Z axis,
and now he's looking this way.
And so now if we see what the user is
looking at in front of this machine,
you can now see that red circle.
But you notice that the audio objects now
are being localized in a different place.
The dog barking is now
to their front left,
and the car horn is to their right.
And the reason I wanted to show this
is there's one sort of main difference,
I think, between graphical objects
and audio objects.
And that's that graphical objects
you're only experiencing while you're
viewing them with your camera or however
you're representing those to the screen.
But the audio objects can be rendered
and experienced all the time.
So it's really important that
they're localized correctly in
your user's speaker configuration.
OpenAL is a great way to
create a multi-channel audio
experience for your application.
OpenAL is a great way to
create a multi-channel audio
experience for your application.
And there are several attributes
to change on the listener so
that they can all be rendered,
you know,
appropriately for what they are.
And I'll walk through a few
of those as we go along here.
So here are the APIs for
generating and deleting a source.
Now you'll notice that both
of them-- except the first
parameter is a size parameter.
That's to indicate how many
sources do you want to create,
how many sources do you want to delete.
And the second parameter for both
of those APIs are integer arrays,
appropriately the same size as whatever
you've passed into the size parameter.
And when you're creating sources,
basically upon the call returning,
that array will be filled out with
some integer names representing
the source names that you'll be
using to reference as you want to
change attributes for those sources.
And then the second,
the delete sources call,
you'll see you pass in an array,
and you fill that in with the
sources that you want to delete,
telling the library, OK,
I don't need these anymore.
So in that case,
we filled it in with 100 and 102,
tell the library we
don't need these anymore,
and the library will delete them.
So an important attribute for
both sources and listener is
the AL position attribute.
This is the way that you move your
objects around in your virtual space,
and they can be applied
both to listener and source,
as I said.
And they're defined in world coordinates,
x, y, z coordinates, where 0, 0,
0 is your center.
And they're just like OpenGL,
they use a right-handed
Cartesian coordinate system.
So if you do that trick with
your right hand and you pass,
you point your thumb to your right
and your index finger straight up
and your middle finger toward you,
that'll tell you the
positive directions on the x,
y, z axes,
if you want to know that little trick.
So one of the things
that you'll want to do,
possibly, since you can now position
your objects around in space,
is have them behave as they
would in a physical world.
In other words,
they should attenuate as the
distance changes from your listener.
And so there's two parts
to doing that in OpenAL.
First,
we set a distance model on the context.
And what that means is we're going to
set a model that will be applied to
all the sources that are moving around
and rendering audio in your context.
I'll talk about the inverse distance
and distance clamped models in just
a second on some subsequent slides.
But just to point out, the AL none,
if you use that distance model,
basically you're just telling OpenAL,
don't do any distance attenuation
for the sources in this context.
Next, you have to set some parameters
on the source itself.
And so those first three,
the reference distance, max distance,
and roll-off factor,
I'll talk to those again in
the next following slides.
If you want to have a source,
not have any distance attenuation,
then you would use the
AL source relative token,
and you can turn distance
attenuation on or off.
So let me show you the slide.
So what you're seeing right here is
an inverse distance square log curve.
And this is the default curve
that distance attenuation
will be using for your source.
Now you'll see there's a green
line on the left-hand side.
That's the reference distance.
And what the reference distance is,
you'll see how it crosses 0 dB,
where it crosses 0 dB
with the orange curve.
That's the point where,
that's the distance at which
your source will have no
amplification or attenuation.
And that's set,
that's a settable attribute.
You can set it to whatever's appropriate
for the units of measurement in
your game or on a per-source basis.
So here's an example of
how we would get that.
Since you can change it
on a per-source basis,
you may want to change that.
And so here's an example
of how you would get it.
In this case,
we're going to get back a value of 1.0.
This happens to be the default
setting when your source is created.
Okay, so the next thing we'll talk about
here is the maximum distance.
So the curve as it is right now,
your sound will continue attenuating and
approach out toward negative infinity,
but long before it would
ever get way out there,
your source is going to stop being
heard because you'll get a decibel
level of attenuation that's quite low.
So you may have a source in
your application that you
want always to be heard.
Now, you may want some attenuation to
occur as you're moving around,
but you may always want it to be heard,
say,
a generator in another room or whatever.
And so you may want some attenuation.
Well,
the way that we do that is by setting
the maximum distance property.
So if I executed this line of code
that's in the box there to 16,
you'll see how the code,
how the curve would change.
And that's now how your
attenuation is going to be.
So you can see that the distance
property is going to be the same as the
distance that you're going to be hearing.
All distances past 16 now
will be stuck at that,
I think it's a negative
30 dB attenuation.
OK, so we've talked about
some source settings.
Now let's look at the distance model.
The curve, as you're seeing it right now,
has been using the
inverse distance model.
And the difference between that
and the clamped model that you
see in the code box is the clamped
model will actually disallow any
amplification between a distance
of 0 and your reference distance.
So by executing this line of code,
where we change the distance model,
you'll see how the curve
is going to change.
And there's a clamping there.
Now to be fair, on OS X,
that clamping's happening
in both distance models.
We don't actually do any amplification
from 0 to the reference distance.
But you should still set that if
that's how you want to behave,
just in case you're running
on a different implementation
on a different platform where
that amplification may occur.
So make sure that you set that.
Okay,
so now one last thing that you'll want to
do to make each source behave differently
is potentially change the curve itself.
So what we've been looking at is
just a straight inverse square law,
but you may want your source to
attenuate either faster or slower as
it moves out towards maximum distance.
And so we're looking at
the default setting of 1.0,
but for instance,
if we changed it now to 2.0,
you'll see how the curve changes,
where attenuation occurs more quickly,
and then when it reaches
that maximum distance,
you'll also notice that its attenuation
is actually at a lower level.
And so those are all the attributes and
properties you'll be changing for setting
your distance attenuation behavior.
Okay, so the next thing we'll
talk about is AL gain.
AL gain is just an attribute
for scaling the amplitude of
the audio samples themselves.
Now, 1.0 just basically is
saying don't do any scaling,
play the audio samples
just exactly as they are,
and a zero basically means play silence.
Now, it's important that since
you cannot go above 1.0,
it's important that you make sure
that when you create your audio
for your game or your application
that you use the full bandwidth.
You can always scale down,
but you can't scale up,
so it's important really to use
the full bandwidth that you can
use for those audio samples.
Now, setting listener gain,
listener gain also,
what that basically does is it
will affect the gain of all the
sources that are being rendered.
And then you'll see also that there's
a min and max bounding properties that
you can use on a per-source basis.
Now,
the API is quite simple for setting this.
You use the AL source F call,
indicate the source that you
want to change and the token.
pass it in a float value, and off you go.
Okay, so the next one we'll
talk about is AL pitch.
This is the property that
Elliot mentioned before,
how you can change
pitch for your sources.
Again, this is just a rate scaler.
1.0 indicates do not do any pitch change,
and it's settable while you're rendering.
And so here's an example of how
you could double the pitch of a
particular source's audio data just
by setting it to a value of 2.0.
Okay, so now you have your source,
your context, your listener, your device.
Your sources need some data to play.
And so here's the last
of those five components,
and that's the OpenAL buffer.
Now,
OpenAL buffers are just buckets of data.
They can be whatever data is
supported by the implementation.
And the library actually
makes its own copy,
so once you pass it in,
you can dispose the copy
that you've passed in.
And I'll show you how that
works in just a second.
Also, they're reusable.
So in other words,
you can generate a buffer,
fill it with some audio data.
Sometime down the road
in your application,
you decide, "Oh,
I don't need that anymore.
Let's reuse this." Pass it some new data.
The library will purge the old
data and then copy in the new.
And unlike the OpenAL sources,
the buffers are not attached
to a particular context.
They can be shared by all available
OpenAL sources across any application.
across any number of OpenALE contexts.
So here are the APIs for
the OpenAL buffers.
You'll notice they look very similar
to the generate and delete source APIs.
Again,
they take a size indicating how many
buffers you want to create or delete,
and then an array of integers,
both either to be filled in
upon creating or to specify the
buffers that you no longer need.
Now, once you've created some buffers,
you need to add some data to them,
and we use the AL Buffer
Data API to do that.
So the first parameter
there is the buffer,
of course,
that you're adding the data to.
And then the next one is the format.
The reason I want to point out the
format is this is actually a constant
that would be defined in your header
files or possibly by an extension,
and I'll talk about
extensions in a little bit,
to define what type of data you're
actually handing to the library.
Now, the box there that just popped
up shows the formats that are
required to be supported by OpenAL,
any OpenAL implementation,
and these are integer--
these are integer PCM files.
formats.
Next, you pass in a buffer of
data and how big it is.
And then lastly,
there's a frequency parameter.
That's the sample rate
of your audio data.
One other note about your audio data.
If you're passing in stereo data,
stereo data won't be localized
in your virtual space.
It always gets rendered to
your front left/right speakers
if you have a surround system,
or it's going to be in your left and
right speaker of your stereo system.
So there are a couple of
different ways typically that
Open-AL sources will play buffers.
Either kind of a one shot or
play this sound on this event,
or maybe a particular buffer
that just loops through.
Or you may actually want to have a
queue of buffers chained together that
can be modified as you're going along,
maybe changed as events are
changing in your application.
And so there's a couple of
different ways to do that.
The Open-AL--the AL buffer token's
typically used for a one shot--
a one shot sound when you're
adding that to your source.
And then the queue buffers
are for manipulating that.
And I'll walk through an example
of how you would use those calls.
Now if you are manipulating a queue,
there's also a couple of tokens for
identifying some state about your queue.
Both one for finding out how many
buffers have been processed or actually
how many buffers are in the queue.
And then, like I said,
you can also use a single shot
buffer to loop continuously.
And so there's a property
for turning that on and off.
And then lastly,
you may want your queue or even your
single shot buffer to loop continuously.
So here's an example.
Let me just walk through a
little usage of how you can
manipulate your buffer queue.
We'll start out with a source that
has a couple of buffers in it,
buffers 1 and 2.
And then it's playing
along and you've decided,
"Oh,
I need to add some more buffers." So you
use the AL Source Queue Buffers API,
and you fill in an array with
the buffer names that you want to
append to the end of your queue.
Now, in this case,
we've added three-- buffer 1, buffer 3,
buffer 4-- and I wanted to point out,
too, that you'll notice that
buffer 1 is being used twice.
There's no limitation on
which buffers can be in there.
It's just going to play these
buckets of data in a sequence.
Okay, so now this is the way that you
would check your queue length.
You've added some buffers.
Maybe you're not keeping
that state yourself.
You can query to see how many
buffers are in your queue.
And in this case, we have five,
so that's the value we're going
to get back from that call.
And your buffer cue's been playing along,
and the gray boxes there denote some
buffers that have already been played.
Now we're playing the third one there.
And you want to find out which
ones have been played so that you
can find out which ones can be
deleted off the front of the cue.
So you're going to get back a value of 2,
and this lets you know I can take
off one buffer or I can take off
two buffers with the un-cue call.
And so here's an example.
We're going to remove one buffer
from your queue using this
AL source on queue buffers call.
And we pass in an array of size 1,
since that's how many we're deleting,
and when the call completes,
that array gets filled in with the
buffer name that was just removed
off the front of your queue.
So in this case, that would be buffer 1.
Okay, so there's nothing really special
here about the playback control calls.
I'll just let those speak for themselves.
Okay,
so back to our initializing routine.
Again, this is some code we're going
to run in just a second.
Other than setting up your
device in your context,
typical usage might be that you
would generate some buffers and
some sources at some non-critical
time in your application,
either when you're knitting at the
beginning or maybe between some
levels or at some non-critical time.
So here we have usage of
the ALGenBuffers call.
We happen to be generating
four buffers in this app.
And then a call to ALGenSources.
Again, we're going to put one
buffer in each source,
so you'll see how that works.
Okay, so now that we have our buffers,
we need to initialize-- need
to do some initializing of
them by passing them some data.
Now, the reason that the line is in
gray here next to the red arrow
is this is not an open AL call.
Your application will have to have
some way of getting your audio data
either out of a file or maybe you've
stored it in some other fashion,
but ultimately you have to get a buffer
of data to then pass to the library.
So you get your data,
then you call "aobuffer_data"
and pass the-- pass the data in.
And then again, to reiterate,
you don't need that data anymore.
The buff--the open AL library
has made a copy of it,
so it's going-- you can
release your copy now.
Okay, now lastly, we need to set up some
attributes on our sources.
So in our example here,
we need to attach a
buffer to each source.
We need to turn looping on
because we want all of our
sounds to play continuously.
We need to set a position in our space.
We need to set a reference distance
that is appropriate for the
virtual space that we've created.
In this case, we're setting it to 5.0.
And then we need to start playing.
So if we could switch to Demo Machine 2,
let me run the code that I've
shown you in those three methods.
Okay, so also the code for this app,
I think,
can be found on the WWDC web pages and,
you
So you can check that out.
There's just very little
bit more OpenAL code than
what I've just showed you.
Basically, the only difference,
the only thing I haven't showed
you are the set calls that we're
going to make as we manipulate
the sources and the listener.
So what we have right here right now
is four sources denoted by the red.
By the red dots,
these are four different sources.
We can move them in space.
And in the center we have a blue
dot that denotes our listener.
And you can see that there's
an arrow there pointing out.
That tells you which
orientation our listener has.
And again, this is a top-down view,
an XZ plane view of this thing.
Alright, so we have our things,
we should be hearing
those all around the room.
And if we change the orientation,
We ought to be hearing all of those
particular sources move around.
And this is just by making
one single orientation call.
"And the library does all the
rest of the work for you." Okay,
so we have that,
and so we can move the orientation.
Now all those sounds are
behind your listener,
so they all ought to be
in the back of the room.
So maybe we want to bring
them up to the front.
And so we'll orient this way,
and here they are up front.
Now let's say we have some,
maybe we don't like the
sound of that monkey,
let's turn him down.
That's an AL gain set call.
And we want the electric sound
to be a little higher pitched,
change the pitch.
So these are just calls to AL pitch,
AL gain, orientation,
and we can turn all the sources down
by setting the listener gain to zero.
And then these are just,
moving these around are
just calls to AL position,
either for the listener.
"Or for the source.
Oh, we've got that one down.
So we can see how we can
move that around the room.
So that's all there is to the app.
It's kind of a simple app,
but it should get you started if you
want to take a look at that code.
So if we can go back to the slides,
please."
One last thing about the
OpenAL architecture is that there
is an extension mechanism so that
if you could check out the sources,
they are available at the Creative site,
and add a feature that you may need
that maybe isn't in the Core APIs.
And the way that you would do that is
by adding an extension and defining
a name for that extension and some
names for your function pointers,
if that's appropriate.
And then there are some APIs for
querying at render time whether
your extension is present or not.
Now, there are some common
extensions out there,
and typically what would happen
is you may propose an extension
to the OpenAL community,
and there may be some documentation
on the OpenAL website,
and so you can get information
about that in that fashion.
And then there are occasions where
that extension may be rolled into the
OpenAL Core APIs via a new specification.
That's actually happening
in the Core APIs.
So we're running right now with
the 1.1 specification that's
being developed at this time,
and it's rolling in some
capture APIs that were only
available as an extension before.
And so these are what the APIs look like.
Again, they both take const strings,
one for querying whether
the extension is present,
and if it is,
then you can go and get function
pointers into that extension.
Okay, so I've talked about the Core APIs,
and you've heard the great story
of why it makes your life easy,
but it's still really important for
you to have an efficient audio system.
Many of you are developing
games that have really highly
computational graphic work and things,
and you don't really want to be
spending a lot of time doing audio.
And the way we've done that in
the Mac OS X implementation is
by using these Core Audio pieces.
And I'll talk about these three,
the 3D Mixer Audio Unit,
the Default Output Audio Unit,
and the Audio Converter
APIs one by one here.
So the 3D Mixer Audio Unit sort
of equates to your OpenAO context.
It's the piece in the
implementation that is doing all
the mixing of your audio sources.
It's doing all the
spatial rendering work.
And it's been optimized,
so it's quite efficient.
And the other thing that it does for
the implementation is it defines which
speaker configurations your user can use.
So currently,
the 3D Mixer Audio Unit supports stereo,
quadraphonic, and 5.0 rendering.
So if there is some point in the
future where 7.1 was appropriate
and the 3D Mixer might support that,
the OpenAO library would just work.
You wouldn't have to do
any changing on your part.
Now, the next piece are the
audio converter APIs.
These sort of--these equate, basically,
to your OpenAO sources.
Each source has its own data
that it's going to be rendering,
and eventually,
it has to get the data that you've
passed to the library into the
native data format for Mac OS X,
which happens to be 32-bit float samples.
So it's really important for you to
have efficient into-float glitters,
and that-- you'll get that
with the audio converter APIs.
The other side benefit is,
since it's--the audio converter
APIs can decode as well,
it's--it'll be a trivial to add support
to decode any particular formats that
are supported on the Mac OS X platform.
Now, the last Core Audio piece
is the default output unit.
Now, this is the piece that does all
the tracking for your user's audio
device that they're rendering to.
And what's nice about this
setup is your application,
again, doesn't have to know anything
about the hardware or the state
of the hardware or what speakers
are connected to the hardware.
You're basically, you're,
the default output unit is
going to do the tracking for
which device is being used,
whether that's your user has
changed it or possibly they're
using a FireWire or a USB box,
maybe it gets unplugged by accident.
OpenAL, the library's just going to keep
rendering because the default output
unit's going to find a new device
and then start rendering to that.
The other thing that can change on your
user's device are its stream formats.
So there could be a change in
the amount of channels that
you're going to be rendering.
There could be a change in the
amount of channels available to
render to or the sample rate.
Maybe your user's changed the sample
rate in some software application
or flipped a switch on their box.
So, again,
the default output audio unit does
all that tracking and does all
that work for the implementation.
So we've been talking about performance.
This is a little piece of information
here that shows you just really how
much the Core Audio implementation
is a win for you.
On the right-hand column are some
CPU load numbers for running a test
in OpenAL while we've been playing
64 PCM sources simultaneously.
And as you can see,
the numbers are quite low,
and that's for running
both in stereo and 5.0,
on maybe a low-end G4
PowerBook platform or a 2.5-gig G5.
And so you can see that those
CPU loads are not going to be a
real bad problem for your game.
Now, on the left-hand side,
you can see what we were using
before we had added these 3D mixer
and the Core Audio implementation
that we have right now.
So there's a couple other
things that we've added.
Since we have this
Core Audio implementation,
we thought it would be good
to expose some of these pieces
through the OpenAL APIs.
And so let me talk
about a couple of these.
First, the spatial rendering quality.
The 3D Mixer actually has the ability
to have a setting for how good
the quality that you render to is.
And so there's a tradeoff between how
good is the quality and how much CPU does
it take versus you want something that
sounds good but doesn't take as much CPU.
And so we've added some
rendering quality settings,
a low and a high.
Now the default is the low setting,
which is an equal power panning.
And it sounds great.
But you may have a case where your
user's on a real high-end system,
maybe they're using-- yeah,
they're on a high-end system and
you can afford some CPU hit to give
them a better audio experience.
You could then give them
that high quality HRTF.
And so this-- this feature only works
when you're rendering to stereo.
Whenever you're rendering to
a multi-speaker configuration,
the 3D Mixer always uses
the sound field setting.
So this might-- the high quality
HRTF may be appropriate for a
headphone setting when your user
has a powerful platform system.
So you see the blue boxes.
Those are the numbers that
we saw on the previous slide.
Now I've added one more platform there,
a G5 iMac,
that's sort of in the middle in
terms of speed and what's available.
And so you can see on the right-hand
column what the HRTF numbers look like.
Now 33% on a G4 is probably
a little intimidating.
Maybe you're not-- maybe you're
not going to want to use that.
But again, this is rendering 64 sources.
That may be more than you're
actually rendering anyway.
But if we--if we start looking at the
numbers for 48 sources and 32 sources,
you can see that we're getting
to a number now where rendering
32 sources on a high-end system,
you can probably still afford to use that
HRTF and really give your users a good
audio-- an even better audio experience.
Okay, the next thing we'll talk about
is the render channel count.
Now, the render channel count is there
so you can force a stereo rendering.
And the reason you might want
to do this is the way that the
OpenAL implementation works is the
default output unit discovers how many
channels are available on the hardware
device your user has set up and then
tries to render to the richest number.
So in other words if there's five or
more channels available to render to,
the OpenAL library is going
to try and then render to 5.0.
If there's four channels
available on your device,
it's going to render to quad.
Otherwise it'll render to stereo.
Well, your user may have a nice 5.1
system that they're using,
but maybe it's late at night
and they have to turn down.
But they don't want-- and so
they plug some headphones in.
So by using this, you can allow your user
to just render to stereo.
You don't have to do anything other
than set this property and your user
does not have to go and reconfigure
how many speakers they have.
You can also set how many speakers
they're rendering to in their
default settings when they set up
their multi-speaker configuration.
And so we do that by using the
AL_SET_INT and the GET_INT calls.
And just by turning,
you can force it to be stereo
or render to the richest,
the multi-channel,
which is the richest amount
of channels possible.
Okay, and lastly we'll talk about
the mixer output rate.
The mixer output rate is here,
and this is really a
mileage may vary property.
It just depends on how many
sources you're rendering,
what the sample rates of
your sources happen to be at,
what the sample rate of the hardware
your user is rendering is at.
And so it's a little easier
to describe in a diagram,
so I'll do that in the next slide.
But just so you see,
you use the AL set double and get
double APIs in order to set it.
In this case, we're setting it to 22K.
And so I can show you a little more
clearly what this really means is
here we have an example where when the
default output unit and the 3D mixer
audio unit are set up at a Nib time,
what happens is the default output
unit goes and discovers the sample
rate of the user's hardware.
And that sample rate gets
propagated down into the 3D mixer.
And so what the 3D mixer
will do by default is take
all of that incoming data,
all those red boxes at
the top-- in this case,
they all happen to be 22K-- and
what it does is it upsamples to that
48K rate before it does any mixing.
And the reason you may
want to change this is,
since we've gone from a 22K to a 48K,
you're now pushing around more than twice
as much data as is necessary in order
to deal and process with those samples.
So by setting the property at the 22K,
as we saw on the previous slide,
now what happens is there's
no sample rate conversion.
And by the way,
the sample rate conversion that gets
done is a cheap linear conversion.
It's not expensive, but still,
the case really here is more
about how much data you're
pushing around in the 3D mixer.
So by setting it to 22K,
what we do now is do all
our processing at 22K,
and then the mixed data is then
passed to the default output
unit and then upsampled at that
point instead of beforehand.
And so that's my part of the talk.
I would like to bring up
Glenda Adams from Aspire Media,
and she's going to talk a
bit about Doom 3 and OpenAL.
Let's see if we can switch
over to the demo machine here.
Okay, there we go.
I'm Glenda Adams, I'm the Director of
Development with Aspire Media,
and I'm really excited to be here today
to show you a first kind of public
unveiling of Doom 3 running under OpenAL.
We don't really need to see that.
Oops, did we disappear?
It's demo two.
We were on there for a second, I think.
I don't know if we lost our video
signal because we switched resolutions.
We can hear it at least.
Maybe that's all we need
for an audio demonstration.
Do you want me to switch
it back to the other?
Yeah, I can switch it back to
the other resolution.
There we go.
Okay.
So when we shipped Doom 3
about three months ago,
it actually shipped with only stereo
output because there really wasn't
any good way for us to do 5.1 output,
even though the game came from
its original platform with a
full 5.1 environmental audio.
So we shipped it,
and it really just didn't sound that,
I mean, it didn't sound bad,
but it didn't sound nearly
as good as it could have.
Now that OpenAL is available under Tiger,
we decided to go ahead and
move it to OpenAL so that we
actually could do full 5.1 audio.
So we're going to jump
into the game here.
This is a later part of the game.
If you don't know anything about Doom 3,
you're actually kind of chasing
demons through a Mars base and
then eventually down into hell.
And this is later in the game where
you've actually gone down in to chase
the demons back to their homeworld.
And this is the game where you've
actually gone down in to chase the
demons back to their homeworld.
And this is the game where you've
actually gone down in to chase the
demons back to their homeworld.
You really can tell it,
as much as the graphics are
quite amazing in Doom 3,
the audio really adds a lot when
you've got a full environmental
sound that's going all around you.
And as you're running through the levels,
it really adds to the immersive
experience of the game.
It's a little bit dark,
but we can kind of go up into here.
As we jump down into this level,
this is a good place where you're
sinking down into a lower level,
and you can kind of see some of the
positional audio as this cage kind of
flies out and hits you and surrounds you
as you're falling down into this pit.
Now we'll actually get to see a
little bit of the bad guys that
we've been chasing around here.
And this is the point where you can
kind of tell that the positional
audio actually really makes
an effect in playing the game.
Because now you can kind of hear
somebody sneaking out from behind you
and realize that you better pay attention
or you're going to be in bad shape.
As you basically run around the
game and it's using OpenAL to
play all these positional sounds,
we're letting basically OpenAL and
Core Audio do all the audio mixing
for us so we don't have to actually
try to figure out where we want to
pan and move all the sounds around.
So that was our little demo of that.
We actually were able to port OpenAL from
the Windows code for Doom 3 relatively
quickly because it's an open standard.
There really wasn't
much we had to change.
It pretty much just came
up and running on the Mac.
And it really was a nice
addition to the game.
It makes it a much more
immersive experience.
They spent a lot of time really
making the audio fit in with
the story and give you a much
more immersive feel to the game.
It makes it a much scarier game.
I couldn't play it at night before with
stereo and I can't play it any at all
now with the 5.1 during the day even.
It's too scary for me.
So we're really excited about
having OpenAL in Tiger and
it's really a great addition.
We're looking forward to using it
for future games and we're going
to release a patch for Doom 3
that enables OpenAL for everybody.
Hopefully shortly in the next few weeks.
Thank you.
Back to slides, please.
Thanks.
Well, we can thank Glenda for
that great demo with Dune 3,
showing you the power of
what you can do with OpenAL.
If you're looking for more information,
though, so where you get started,
how to get started,
and how you can get up
and running with this,
you can get some documentation
up on the WWDC website.
And you can also come to tomorrow's
lab at noon in the Graphics and
Media Lab right around the corner,
and if you're working on
your game already and you got
started and you want some help,
like right now, you can go over there
tomorrow around noon.
We'll be there from noon to 6.
Stop in there, talk to me, Bob,
or any of the Core Audio engineers,
and we might be able to help you.
Here's some contact information.
Here's my email.
Rich Hernandez, marketing games engineer.
And Bob Barron, the Core Audio engineer.
You heard much about how to
use the OpenAL implementation.
And you can also contact Garen
Herbert from Creative Labs.
This is the CVS repository owner.
If you're writing games using OpenAL,
contact him and let him know that, hey,
I wrote a game using OpenAL,
and he'll add you to the long list
of growing games using OpenAL.
Here's a list for the OpenAL website,
and we also have an OpenAL mailing list.
When you start with your implementations
and you have API questions that,
hey, I'm doing this,
and am I supposed to use
this buffer with this method,
this is a great list.
It's very active,
so you can get a lot of help that way.
You can also contact DTS if you
need specific help with your game,
too.